When we began working with
supervised machine learning methods,
we evaluated a classifier's
performance using its accuracy.
Accuracy, as you might recall,
is the fraction of samples that
were classified correctly.
That is, where the classifier's predicted
label matched the correct or true label.
We also evaluated a regression
model's performance using the default
r squared metric.
In this module, you'll learn why measures
like accuracy, which are simple and
easy to understand, also have drawbacks.
In that they don't give
a complete enough picture
of a supervised learning
model's performance.
And may not be the right metric for
measuring success in your application.
So we're going to cover several additional
evaluation metrics beyond accuracy.
We'll see how they're defined,
what the motivation is for using them, and
how to use them scikit-learn to
get a better picture of how well
A supervised model is
doing on a given data set.
You'll also learn how about to choose
the right evaluation matrix for your
application that can help you select the
best model or find the optimal parameters.
So let's return for
a moment to this workflow diagram that
we introduced earlier in the course.
You see that evaluation
is a key part of this
development cycle in
applied machine learning.
Once a model is trained, the evaluation
step provides critical feedback
on the trained model's
performance characteristics.
Particularly those that might be
important for your application.
The results of the evaluation step,
for example, might help you understand
which data instances are being
classified or predicted incorrectly.
Which might in turn suggest better
features or different kernel function or
other refinements to your learning model
in the feature and model refinement phase.
As we discussed earlier, the objective
function that's optimized during
the training phase may be a different,
what's called a surrogate metric.
That's easier to use in practice for
optimization purposes than what's used for
the evaluation metric.
For example, a commercial search engine
might use a ranking algorithm that is
trained to recommend relevant web
pages that best match a query.
In other words, trying to predict
a relevant label for a page.
And that might be the objective
in the training phase.
But there are many evaluation methods in
the evaluation phase that could be applied
to measure aspects of that search engine's
performance using that ranking algorithm,
that are important to the search
company's business, for example.
Such as how many unique users
the system sees per day.
Or how long the typical user
search session is and so on.
So the evaluation measures
are the ones that in the end
are used to select between different
trained models or settings.
Actually commercial search
applications typically use a scorecard
of multiple evaluation metrics to
make important business decisions.
Or development decisions about
what models are chosen for use.
So it's very important
to choose evaluation
methods that match the goal
of your application.
For predicting the correct digit
from a handwritten image, let's say,
where each digit is equally likely,
then accuracy may be a sufficient metric.
However, there are other possible aspects
of evaluation of model performance that
are beyond average accuracy that
may be critical to measure.
For example,
in a health application that uses
a classifier to detect tumors in a medical
image, we may want the classifier
to error on the side of caution.
And flag anything that even has
a small chance of being cancerous.
Even if it means sometimes incorrectly
classifying healthy tissue as diseased.
In this case,
the classifier evaluation method
would try to reduce what are called
false negative predictions.
We'll look at this in more detail shortly.
More generally, your application goal
might be based on very different metrics,
such as user satisfaction,
amount of revenue to your page, or
increase in patient survival rates.
So in the end, you'll be selecting the
model or parameter settings that optimize
those end evaluation metrics
that are important to your goal.
So in this module,
we'll be focusing first on the widely used
case of evaluating binary classification.
And then we'll look at evaluation for
the more general case of multi-class
evaluation as well as regression.
Before we start defining and
using some evaluation metrics for
binary classification, lets start by
looking at example of why just looking at
accuracy may not be enough to gain a good
picture of what a classifier's doing.
It'll also show us how knowing more about
the types of errors a learning algorithm
makes can help us get a better picture
of a model's predictive performance.
First, let's consider the case where
we have a binary classification task,
where there are a lot of instances
labeled with the negative class.
But only a few instances that
belong to the positive class.
For example, we might see this scenario
in online search or recommender systems.
Where the system has to predict whether or
not to display an advertisement or
product suggestion.
Or show a query suggestion or
item on a page that's likely to be
relevant given a user's query and what
they clicked on in the past and so on.
So those would be the positive examples.
But of course there are many,
many irrelevant items
that are in the negative class that
don't make sense to show a user.
And so this is called
an imbalanced class scenario.
Another example might be datasets
of credit card transactions.
Where the vast majority of transactions
are classified as normal and not fraud
with a small minority of transactions
that could be classified as fraudulent.
These situations, which also apply to
multi-class classification problems,
involve datasets that
have imbalanced classes.
Imbalanced classes are very common
in machine learning scenarios, so
it's important to understand
how to work with them.
In particular, let's assume that
we have an e-commerce application.
Where for every 1,000 randomly
sampled product items,
one of them is relevant to a user's
need and the other 999 are not relevant.
So recall that accuracy
computed over a set of
instances is just the number of instances
where the classifier's label prediction
was correct divided by
the total number of instances.
Let's suppose you develop a classifier for
predicting relevant e-commerce items.
And after you've finished the development,
you measure its accuracy on
the test set to be 99.9%.
At first, that might seem to
be amazingly good, right?
That's incredibly close to perfect.
But let's compare that
to a dummy classifier
that always just predicts the most likely
class, namely, the not relevant class.
In other words,
no matter what the actual instance is,
the dummy classifier will always
predict that an item is not relevant.
So if we have a test set
that has 1,000 items,
on average 999 of them will
be not relevant anyway.
So our dummy classifier will correctly
predict the not relevant label for
all of those 999 items.
And so the accuracy of the dummy
classifier is also going to be 99.9%.
So in reality our own classifier's
performance isn't impressive at all.
It's no better than just always predicting
The majority class without
even looking at the data.
Let's take a look at another example of
classification with imbalanced classes on
a real dataset using our notebook.
I'll start here using the digits dataset,
which has images of handwritten digits
labeled with ten classes,
representing the digits zero through nine.
As we can see by letting the dataset and
then computing the count of
instances in each class,
using numpy's bin count method.
There are roughly the same number
of instances in each class.
So this dataset has balanced classes.
However with this digits dataset,
now what we're going to do is create a new
dataset with two imbalanced classes.
By labelling all digits that are not
the digit 1 as the negative class
with label 0, and digits that are 1
as the positive class, label 1.
So what I've done here is dump the first
few entries from the original labels
along with the new binary label, so
you can see the imbalance visually.
Now when we use bincount, we can see that
there are about 1,600 negative examples,
but only 182 positive examples.
So indeed, we have a dataset
that is class imbalanced.
Or as expected almost exactly
a nine to one ratio of negative to
positive examples.
Now let's create a train test
partition on this imbalance set.
And then train a support vector
machine classifier with these binary
labels using the radial
basis function as a kernel.
We get the accuracy using
the score method, and
we can see this is just over 90%.
Again at first glance, 90% accuracy for
a classifier seems pretty good.
However, now let's create
a Dummy Classifier
that correctly reflect the class imbalance
to see if 90% really is that impressive.
scikit-learn makes it easy
to create a dummy classifier
just by using the DummyClassifier
class as shown here.
Dummy classifiers, again,
are called that because they don't even
look at the data to make a prediction.
They simply use the strategy or
rule of thumb that you instruct
them to use, when creating them.
In fact, when you create the classifier,
you set the strategy argument to tell it
what rule of thumb to use
to make its predictions.
So here,
we set this to the most frequent strategy
to predict the most frequent class.
The DummyClassifier here is used
just like a regular classifier.
So to prepare it for prediction,
we call the fit method on the x_train and
y_train variables that hold
the training set instances and labels.
Now this DummyClassifier won't actually be
looking at the individual data instances
of those variables.
But it does use the y train variable to
determine which class in the training data
is most frequent.
Finally, just like a regular classifier,
we can call the predict method to
make predictions on the test set.
This example shows the output of
the DummyClassifier's predictions.
And as promised, you can see it's always
predicting 0 or the negative class for
every instance in the test set.
Now we can call the usual score method to
get the accuracy of the DummyClassifier's
constant negative prediction.
And we can see it's also 90%,
the same as our earlier support vector
machine classifier with
radio bases function kernel.
So that support vector classifier
was actually performing only
very slightly better
than the DummyClassifier.
The dummy classifier provides what
is called a null accuracy baseline.
That is the accuracy that can be achieved
by always picking the most frequent class.
You should not use a dummy classifier for
real classification problems, but
it does provide a useful sanity
check in point of comparison.
There are other types of dummy classifiers
that provide null base lines corresponding
to other choices of the strategy
parameter as shown here.
Most_frequent is the strategy we've
just seen that always predicts
the most_frequent label.
The stratified strategy, unlike
the constant most_frequent prediction
is a random prediction that's
based on the class distributions.
For example, if the positive class occurs
90% of the time in the training set.
Then the stratified DummyClassifier
will output the positive class
label with 90% probability.
Otherwise, it will output
the negative class label.
This can help ensure that metrics that
rely on having counts of both positive and
negative class prediction
outcomes can be computed.
The uniform strategy is another random
prediction method that will generate class
predictions uniformly at random.
That is, all classes have
an equal chance at being output
as opposed to being weighed by their
frequency in the training set.
This strategy may be useful for
gaining an accurate estimate of
what the most common types of
prediction errors for each class.
Finally, the constant strategy can be
useful when computing some metrics
like F score,
which we will cover in a few minutes.
Well, why is that?
Well, when we have a binary
classification task where the most
frequent class is the negative class.
Turns out that using the most
frequent strategy will never predict
the positive class.
And will never be able to count the number
of positive instances that are correctly
predicted.
And so the overall count of such
positive correct predictions will be 0.
So this in turn as you
will see in a few minutes,
we'll cause some important metrics
like F scores to always be zero.
So using the constant strategy,
we can force a dummy classifier to always
predict the positive class even if it's
the minority class in a set of classes.
And this will lead to more
meaningful computation of F-score.
So what does it mean if we discover
that our classifier has close
to the DummyClassifier's performance?
While typically it means that the features
in our model may be ineffective,
or erroneously computed or
missing for some reason,
it could also be caused by a poor choice
of kernel or hyperparameter in the model.
For example, if we change the support
vector classifier's kernel parameter to
linear from rbf.
And recompute the accuracy
on this retrain classifier,
we can see that this leads to much
better performance of almost 98%
compared to the most frequently
class based line of 90%.
Finally, if you have accuracy that is
close to that of a dummy classifier,
it could be because there is
indeed a large class imbalance.
And the accuracy gains produced by
the classifier on the test set simply
applied too few examples to
produce a significant gain.
In general, for
imbalanced classification problems,
you should use metrics
other than accuracy.
We'll look at one shortly called AUC,
which is short for area under the curve.
DummyRegressors, as you might guess, are
the counterpart to DummyClassifiers for
regression.
And they serve a similar role
as a null outcome baseline and
sanity check for regression models.
Since regression models have
continuous value prediction outputs.
The strategy parameter for DummyRegressors
gives you a choice of function that
you can apply to the distribution of
target values found in the training set.
You can ask for the mean or
median value of the training set targets.
The value corresponding to
the quantile that you provide Or
a custom constant value.
Now let's look more carefully
at the different types
of outcomes we might see
using a binary classifier.
This will give us some
insight into why using
just accuracy doesn't give a complete
picture of the classifier's performance.
And will motivate our definition and
exploration of additional
evaluation metrics.
With a positive and negative class,
there are four possible outcomes that we
can break into two cases corresponding to
the first and second row of this matrix.
If the true label for an instance is
negative, the classifier can predict
either negative, which is correct,
and call the true negative.
Or it can erroneously predict positive,
which is an error and
called a false positive.
If the true label for an instance is
positive, the classifier can predict
either negative, which is an error and
called a false negative.
Or it can predict positive, which is
correct and that's called a true positive.
So maybe a quick way to remember this is
that the first word in these matrix cells
is false, if it's a a classifier error,
or true if it's a classifier success.
The second word is negative if
the true label is negative and
positive if the true label is positive.
Another name for
a false positive that you might know
from statistics is a type one error.
And another name for
a false negative is a type two error.
We're going to use these two-letter
combinations, TN, FN, FP,
and TP, as variable names, when defining
some new evaluation metrics shortly.
We'll also use capital N here to denote
the total number of instances, of the sum
of all the values in the matrix, the
number of data points we're looking at.
This matrix of all combinations
of predicted label and
true label is called a confusion matrix.
We can take any classifier
prediction on a data instance and
associate it with one of these
matrix cells, depending on
the true label of the instance and
the classifier's predicted label.
This also applies to
multi-class classification,
in addition to the special case of
binary classification I've shown here.
In the multi-class case with k classes,
we simply have a k by k matrix
instead of a two by two matrix.
Scikit-learn makes it easy to compute
a confusion matrix for your classifier.
Let's take a look at the notebook.
Here, we import the confusion
matrix class from sklearn.metrics.
We're going to use the same training
set from the digits data set
with the binary imbalance
labels that we created earlier.
To get the confusion matrix, we simply
pass the y_test set of predicted labels
and the y predicted set of predicted
labels and then print the output.
The order of the cells of the little
matrix output here is the same as the one
I just showed on the slide.
True negative and false negative are in
the first column, and true positive and
false positive are in the second column.
In particular, the successful predictions
of the classifier are on the diagonal
where the true class matches
the predicted class.
The cells off the diagonal represent
errors of different types.
Here, we compute the confusion matrices
for different choices of classifier in
the problem so we can see how they shift
slightly with different choices of model.
And this gives us some insight
into the nature of successes and
failures observed for
each type of classifier.
So first, we'll apply the most frequent
class DummyClassifier we saw earlier.
What we can see here is
that the right column,
that represent cases where the classifier
predicted the positive class, is all zero.
Which makes sense for this dummy
classifier because it's always predicting
the negative class, the most frequent one.
We see that 407 instances
are true negatives, and
there are 43 errors that
are false negatives.
Here we apply the stratified
DummyClassifier that gives random output
in proportion to the ratio
labels in the training set.
Now the right column is no longer all zero
because this DummyClassifier does predict
occasionally predict the positive class.
If we add the numbers in the right column,
we see that 32 plus 6 equals 38 times
the number of times the classifier
predicted the positive class.
Of those times, in six cases, the lower
right diagonal, this was a true positive.
In the next case, we'll apply a support
vector classifier with linear kernel and
seed parameter equal to one.
We note that looking along the diagonal
compared to the stratified dummy
classifier above, which had a total of
375 plus 6, or 381 correct predictions.
The support vector classifier
has a total of 402 plus 38,
which is 440 correct predictions
on the same data set.
Likewise, we can apply a logistic
regression classifier, and
that obtains similar results to
the support vector classifier.
And finally, we can apply
a decision tree classifier, and
look at the confusion matrix
that results from that.
One thing we notice is, that unlike
the support vector or logistic regression
classifier, which had balanced numbers
of false negatives and false positives.
The decision tree makes more than
twice as many false negative errors,
17 of them actually, as false positive
errors, of which there are 7.
Now that we've seen how a confusion matrix
can give us a little more information
about the types of errors a classifier
makes, we're ready to move ahead and and
define some new types of evaluation
metrics that use information from
the computing matrix to give different
perspectives on classifier performance